---
layout: archive
title: "Conference Papers"
excerpt: "Conference Papers"
permalink: /conference papers/
author_profile: true
---

1. **Liu, J.**, Li, D., Chen, J. (2023). How Human Identity Transcends Machines: Techno-Ethics of Generative Artificial Intelligence from the Critical Cybernetics Perspective. Presented at the _2023 Media Culture Forum_, Shanghai, China. (in Chinese)
   - Abstract: What makes us human, and how do we transcend machines? This article explores the importance of human identity in the context of the continuous rise of generative artificial intelligence. The article first introduces the historical evolution of human-machine language interaction technology and the technical composition of this revolutionary language interaction model, ChatGPT. Secondly, from a critical perspective on cybernetics, the article posits that the unique identity inherent in humans is the key to what defines us as humans. This identity encompasses consciousness and subjective experiences, emotional perception and resonance, morality and ethics, self-shaping, and development. The article also discusses the technological limitations of generative artificial intelligence and calls for a rational approach to the future of human-machine symbiosis.

2. Lin, H., **Liu, J.**, Guo, J. (2023). Trade Less Attention for Better Memory? An EEG Study on the Effect of Media Multitasking on Online Course Videos. Presented at the _2023 Annual Conference of the International Association for Media and Communication Research_ _**(IAMCR)**_, online.

3. Dong, S., **Liu, J.**, Tian, Y., Yu, M. (2023). Influencing Factors of Selective Avoidance of Chinese WeChat Moments Users in Controversial Public Events: Interpersonal Needs, Emotional Perception and Digital Unfriending. Presented at the _2023 Annual Conference of the International Association for Media and Communication Research **(IAMCR)**_, online.

4. **Liu, J.**, Ma, C., Wang, R. (2023). Social Bots’ Role in U.S. Abortion Bill Discussion on Twitter: Topic Construction and Social Interaction. Presented at the _73rd Annual Conference of the International Communication Association **(ICA)**_, Toronto, Canada.

5. **Liu, J.** (2022). Chasing Stars in the Metaverse: A Research on the Influencing Factors of Parasocial Relationships with Virtual Idols. Presented at Presented at the _2022 Annual Conference of the International Association for Media and Communication Research **(IAMCR)**_, Beijing, China.

6. Wu, J., **Liu, J.** (2021). We Pay, We Share: Influencing Factors of Digital Knowledge Sharing Behaviors in Chinese Knowledge-paid Communities. Presented at the _2021 Annual Conference of Asian Network for Public Opinion Research and the Asia-Pacific Communication Alliance_, online.

   - Abstract: [Purpose/Meaning] With the development of Internet technology, knowledge-paid communities begin to emerge in China, building new knowledge systems online. Analyzing influencing factors of digital sharing behaviors can help us understand the relationships aggregated by paying for knowledge and why people still show a sharing willingness after paying. [Method/Process] Based on the theory of knowledge ecology and planned behavior, this research re-examines the influencing factors of knowledge sharing behaviors in online pre-paid communities from four dimensions of knowledge, knowledge subjects, information technology and knowledge environment, and constructs a model to measure them. It uses methods of questionnaire survey and structural equation modeling, and software SPSS 22.0 and AMOS 21.0 are also used to perform statistical analysis. [Results/Conclusions] The results show that three factors of knowledge, information technology and knowledge environment all have positive influences on sharing behaviors through the members’ willingness to share the knowledge. Among them, knowledge environment has the greatest influence, which means the three types of factors in communication environment--opinion environment, interaction atmosphere and mutual assistance are getting important in the decisive process of whether to share the knowledge in communities. Those factors depend on the members’ perception and understanding of cohesion inside communities. [Originality] This research confirms the originality of contents and questionnaire data obtained. It puts forward a model for the construction of social environment factors from the perspective of knowledge ecology based on the development of online knowledge communities in China, trying to provide references for researches in other regions around the world.

7. **Liu, J.** (2021). A Delayed Gratification: How Chinese Middle-aged and Elderly Women Seek Emotional Compensation from Women Disguised as Men Short Videos. Accepted by the _105th Annual Conference of the National Communication Association **(NCA)**_.

   - Abstract: Based on the use and gratification theory, this research conducts in-depth interviews with Chinese middle-aged and elderly women who frequently watch women disguised as men short videos. By analyzing their media dependence, this research explores the gratification effects on interviewers’ emotional care, finding that it can relieve the stress of Chinese middle-aged and elderly women, and provides them an opportunity to discover multi-faceted personal value, thus reshaping their perceptions of traditional gender roles. 

8. **Liu, J.** (2021). The Influence of Chinese Students’ Media Behavior on Political Identity in a Risk Society: An Empirical Study Based on Chinese Media Coverage of COVID-19 in U.S. Presented at the _Seminar on Public Opinion in Health Emergencies_, Sichuan, China. (in Chinese)

   - Abstract: The global outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 provided an outlet for tensions between ideologically different countries, notably escalating into a focal point of media and public opinion warfare between China and the United States. This research, grounded in the theory of risk society, focuses on university students as the subject group. Employing a questionnaire survey and utilizing research methodologies such as content analysis, keyword co-occurrence, and scale measurement, the study explores and analyzes the cultivation effect of COVID-19-related reports involving the United States on the online social mindset of university students. The study findings indicate that gender and educational levels do not influence the cultivation of the online social mindset of university students regarding mainstream media reports related to the United States' involvement in the pandemic. However, the degree of university students' exposure to these reports through mainstream media does impact the cultivation of their online social mindset. Additionally, there exists a significant correlation among the three components of the online social mindset: social cognition, social emotions, and social values.

9. **Liu, J.** (2021). Visualization of Data Journalism of China s Mainstream Media in Public Health Emergences: Taking the Data News Section of Xinhua Net as An Example. Presented at the _5th International Conference on Graphics, Images and Interactive Techniques_, online.

   - Abstract: In the context of Chinese media, the practice of data news visualization during the COVID-19 pandemic presents unique characteristics. In order to explore the visualization mode of China's data news reports during the epidemic, this article uses the method of content analysis to analyze the data news reports related to the epidemic released by the data news section of Xinhua Net from January 22, 2020 to October 26, 2020. The article discussed the innovations in the application form and narrative characteristics of China’s mainstream media visualization practice from three aspects, and proposed improvements to the deficiencies. The research found that the data news related to the epidemic focus on data analysis in terms of production methods, and use simple and easy-to-understand diagrams for visual design, and use both traditional and advanced infographics; but it also reflects a lack of the richness of data source, mainly including static information charts and insufficient interactivity.

10. **Liu, J.**, Chen, Z. (2020). Mutual Construction of Media Behavior and Environmental Concern Among College Students in Post-epidemic Situations: A Mediation Model Based on the New Ecological Paradigm. Presented at the _2020 China Applied Journalism and Communication Forum_, Beijing, China. (in Chinese)

    - Abstract: In the post-pandemic era, there has been considerable attention given to the reflection on the relationship between the ecological environment and human society. Research on pro-environmental media behaviors in the online sphere has become one of the focal points in environmental communication issues. This study conducted measurements on university students using the New Ecological Paradigm Scale and the Social Expectation Scale. Additionally, a structural equation model was employed to examine the mediating role of social expectations between environmental concern and pro-environmental media behaviors. The results indicate that: (1) Gender does not significantly influence pro-environmental media behaviors among university students. There are no significant differences between male and female students regarding environmental concern and pro-environmental media behaviors. (2) Social expectations partially mediate the relationship between environmental concern and pro-environmental media behaviors. Environmental concern still predominantly influences pro-environmental media behaviors.
