---
layout: archive
title: "Publications"
permalink: /publications/
author_profile: true
---

{% include base_path %}

1. **Liu, J.** (forthcoming). Virtual Presence, Real Connections: Exploring the Role of Parasocial Relationships in Virtual Idol Fan Community Participation. Accepted by _Global Media and China_.  

   - Abstract: The reconstruction of idol worship culture is evident with the rise of virtual personas, especially within the realm of AI-powered entities. It is important to consider cultural specificities, particularly in regions like China, where unique fan culture practices intersect with the proliferation of AI technology. Virtual idols, born from digital media technologies, authentically emulate real idols in performances and human interactions. While existing research primarily focuses on real-life idols in the interaction between celebrities and fans, limited attention has been given to understanding why fans gravitate toward virtual idols. Adopting the perspective of parasocial relationships (PSRs) and employing the survey method, this study explores the factors that drive fan community participation in virtual idol fandom within the context of Chinese society. The findings reveal that both interpersonal attractiveness and feelings of loneliness significantly influence the development of parasocial relationships between virtual idols and fans, and these PSRs positively impact fan community participation. Furthermore, this study elucidates that both the perceived interpersonal attractiveness of virtual idols and the loneliness experienced by fans directly contribute to increased fan community participation through the mediating effect of PSRs. This investigation scrutinizes the pivotal factors sustaining the relationship between virtual idols and fans, particularly in an era where AI-powered entities increasingly mirror human-like qualities and adeptly engage with audiences. This study highlights the characteristics of Chinese subculture and provide evidence for the “de-stigmatization” of subcultures in the era of AI, which contributes to a broader discourse on the impact of AI on diverse cultural practices. It underscores the necessity for global and contextual approaches in comprehending the evolving dynamics between virtual idols and their fan communities, enriching our understanding of AI’s influence on cultural phenomena.

2. Wang, X., **Liu, J.** (2021). A Research on the Platform-based Governance of Short Video Social Media: from the Perspective of Social Participation of Diverse Groups. _Southeast Communication,_ 2021(10):40-43. (in Chinese)

   - Abstract: With the rise of short videos, social media platforms have expanded into various societal groups, becoming pivotal platforms for information dissemination. This research aims to explore the evolution of media platformization and, based on this trajectory, analyze the developmental trends of short-video social media platforms. Furthermore, it seeks to analyze the behavioral characteristics of diverse groups on platformized social media and identify the challenges faced by these groups in participating in platformized governance. Through this analysis, the study aims to propose recommendations for innovative practices in the future development of short-video social media platforms.

Works in progress
======
1. **Liu, J.**, Ma, C., Wang, R. (under major revision). Amplifying Contention or Promoting Feminism? Topic Construction and Human-Bot Interaction on Twitter around the Overturning of Roe v. Wade. Submitted to _Computers in Human Behavior_.

   - Abstract: Social bots are disrupting the authenticity of social discussions by generating human-machine interaction. The aim of the current study was to explore the role of social bots in discourse about a feminist issue on social media. By analyzing a dataset of 780,358 tweets specifically related to U.S. abortion legislation, we discovered active participation of social bots in discussions about the overturning of Roe v. Wade on Twitter in 2022. First, hashtag co-occurrence analysis revealed less diversity in the hashtags used by social bots than those used by humans. In addition, subtheme analysis indicated that social bots intentionally amplified specific subthemes and that discussion about the U.S. abortion laws preferred by social bots were highly associated with partisan election issues, suggesting an inflammatory effect. In terms of stance analysis, we found that social bots posted more tweets opposing abortion rights than humans did, indicating a disruption of the consistency of specific hashtags. Social bots opposing abortion rights were more active in generating interaction among users than in mere tweet dissemination. Finally, by analyzing the interaction between social bots and human accounts, we discovered that social bots used deception to engage humans in conversations and propagate target viewpoints. Based on these findings, we summarize how automation generates human-bot interaction and provide recommendations for shaping public understanding of feminist issues in the era of artificial intelligence.

2. Dong, S., **Liu, J.**, Yu, M. (under review). Digital Unfriending in _Guanxi_ Society: Influencing Factors of Selective Avoidance of Chinese WeChat Moments Users in Controversial Public Events. Submitted to _China Journalism and Communication Journal._ (in Chinese)

   - Abstract: While controversial public events keep triggering general discussion, the diversity of ideological cognition generates different opinions and may affect user friendships and lead to digital break-ups. This behavior of terminating social relationships, such as deleting, blacklisting, and blocking to avoid other people’s content, is defined as selective avoidance on social media platforms, which used to be a sensitive topic in China’s _Guanxi_ society. Previous studies lack exploration in Chinese contexts. Based on the theory of interpersonal needs, we used the mixed method to explore the influencing factors in WeChat Moments. Semi-structured focus group interviews were first conducted, and we proposed a new dimension of social value need. In the questionnaire survey (n = 537, 62.6% female), we found that the social media space is more focused on the “viewpoint” connection compared with traditional society’s “relationship” connection. Affection need and control need positively influence selective avoidance through emotional perception. Emotional perception plays a fully mediating role in online social interaction in the Chinese context. It has become an essential factor in deciding whether to maintain a friendship on social media. This study examines the introduction of selective avoidance theory into the context of China’s Guanxi society and uncovers how information overload has changed the digital interaction norms of the younger generation in China by increasing the costs associated with information acquisition and maintaining social relationships.

3. **Liu, J.**, Du, Q. When Algorithms Hide behind Avatars: Understanding Superficial Anthropomorphism and Limited Subjectivity of AI Job Interview Systems and Their Impact on User Experience. Submitted to the _74th Annual Conference of the International Communication Association (ICA)_.

   - Abstract: Can you imagine your behavior and speech being monitored and scored by an algorithm? This study centers on the distinct psychological impact of AI recruitment interview systems on the interviewees compared to human interviewers, aiming to uncover the underlying processes that give rise to these divergent experiences. Utilizing a focus group interview method, this study examines the user experience of individuals interacting with AI recruitment interview systems. Our findings identify self-efficacy, social presence, perceived usability, and technological uncertainty as important psychological factors for interviewees during AI job interviews, offering insights for future investigations into how individuals perform in recruitment scenarios involving AI. Additionally, this study uncovers that the algorithms applied in current job recruitment systems exhibit superficial anthropomorphism and limited subjectivity. AI interview systems may emulate human expressions, actions, and engage in rudimentary interactions, yet they inherently remain distinct from real humans. These revelations underscore the enduring disparities between “human-machine communication” and “interpersonal communication,” offering a reference for further exploration into human-machine communication and the refinement of AI subjectivity in practical applications.

4. **Liu, J.**, Dong, S. In A Competitive Society, You Do Not Have to View Peers as Competitors: The Role of Reciprocity in Information-sharing among China’s Young Generation. Submitted to the _74th Annual Conference of the International Communication Association (ICA)_.

   - Abstract: In an increasingly competitive Chinese society, when faced with limited opportunities, do young people tend to view their peers as competitors or as potential resource-sharing partners? As an exchangeable resource, information reshapes the maintenance of relationships and trust-building among young Chinese people and their peers. Drawing on social exchange theory, this study explored the factors influencing the willingness of Chinese youth to share information when facing potential competitors by analyzing a sample of 524 questionnaires. The results revealed that two social factors (societal risk perception and perceived competitiveness) and two personality traits (trait anxiety and trait competitiveness) positively influenced the reciprocity expectations of information-sharing. Reciprocity expectations partially mediated the relationship between societal risk perception/perceived competitiveness and willingness to share information, and reciprocity expectations also fully mediated the relationship between trait anxiety/trait competitiveness and willingness to share information, suggesting that young individuals with different personality traits foster their willingness to share information through their expectations of mutual support in a highly competitive and uncertain social environment. This study provides insights into the transformation of interpersonal interaction within competitive social contexts and underscores the significance of reciprocity in promoting the prosocial role of information and knowledge sharing.
